Add post anti-patterns with secrets in java (#988)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2021-12-14-antipatterns-secrets-java.adoc

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Five Anti-Patterns with Secrets in Java"
author: brian-demers
by: advocate
communities: [security,java]
description: "Learn how how to better manage and protect your passwords and API keys!"
tags: [java, security, secrets, cryptography, tips]
tweets:
- "When was the last time you checked a password into source control? 🤦 Here are a few tips to avoid that and more‼️"
- "API keys, passwords, and secrets. Learn a few common anti-patterns to avoid ⚠️"
- "Secrets, passwords, and API keys oh my‼️ Make sure you are handling them correctly 🧑‍💻"
image:
type: awareness
---

:toc: macro
:page-liquid:
:experimental:

Most applications require some sort of secret or password to enable access: database connection info, API keys, OAuth client secrets, and JWT keys, to list some examples. Dealing with secrets in your projects is always a chore, and it's often done wrong. In this post, I'll describe five common problems, which you can think of as *anti-patterns* (the opposite of a *best practice*) and I'll offer suggestions to help you avoid these issues.

toc::[]

> == 1. Don't check your secrets into source control

Reviewer: If these are anti-patterns, shouldn't this be more like "Check your secrets into source control"?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== 1. Checking secrets into source control
```
to Matt's point.

Checking a secret into source control is a mistake that's easily made. This is an anti-pattern that most of us have done in error at some point, even if we don't want to admit it. Once a secret is in your source control, it's there forever; it only takes https://github.com/search?q=removed+password&type=commits[a quick history search] to find.

If you find a secret in your source, remove it and revoke it. Of course, it's best if secrets are never checked in to begin with! Watch out for them in code reviews and scan your code bases to ensure this doesn't happen: https://www.gitguardian.com/[GitGuardian] and https://github.com/awslabs/git-secrets[git-secrets].

> Secrets often enter source trees by accident, usually because you temporarily typed one into a config file. When secrets are mixed in with other application properties, they become harder to spot and easier to forget about. Keep secrets out of your source entirely by using an https://12factor.net/config[external configuration] provider like [Hashicorp Vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/[Hashicorp Vault]), using environmental variables, or by keeping secrets in a separate file outside of your source tree (or one that is explicitly ignored in your `.gitignore` file.)

Reviewer: Hashicorp should be HashiCorp and should be an AsciiDoc link, not Markdown.

Author: Doh! that's what i get for updating the link through GitHub 🤦 
Thank you!

> Secrets often enter source trees by accident, usually because you temporarily typed one into a config file. When secrets are mixed in with other application properties, they become harder to spot and easier to forget about. Keep secrets out of your source entirely by using an https://12factor.net/config[external configuration] provider like [Hashicorp Vault](https://www.vaultproject.io/[Hashicorp Vault]), using environmental variables, or by keeping secrets in a separate file outside of your source tree (or one that is explicitly ignored in your `.gitignore` file.)

Author: ```suggestion
Secrets often enter source trees by accident, usually because you temporarily typed one into a config file. When secrets are mixed in with other application properties, they become harder to spot and easier to forget about. Keep secrets out of your source entirely by using an https://12factor.net/config[external configuration] provider like https://www.vaultproject.io/[HashiCorp Vault], using environmental variables, or by keeping secrets in a separate file outside of your source tree (or one that is explicitly ignored in your `.gitignore` file.)
```

assertThat(decoded, equalTo(decoded));
----

.Base64 encoded (not human-readable):
[source,java]
----
String text = "Can you still read this text?";
String encoded = Base64.getEncoder().encodeToString(text.getBytes(UTF_8));
// encoded: Q2FuIHlvdSBzdGlsbCByZWFkIHRoaXMgdGV4dD8=
String decoded = new String(Base64.getDecoder().decode(encoded.getBytes(UTF_8)));
assertThat(decoded, equalTo(decoded));
----

IMPORTANT: In both cases, the encoded data can easily be reversed, and the encoded string must be treated the same way as plain text.

=== Encryption

In contrast, data that's encrypted can only be read by authorized parties (anyone with the correct cryptographic key). When data is encrypted, the resulting value is indistinguishable from random data. Because of this, encrypted data is often also encoded to make it easier to transport. For example, in the case of JSON Web Encryption (JWE), the JSON payload is encrypted and is then transformed to a base64-encoded string.

NOTE: Encryption is a complex topic and not suitable for a quick example. If you want to see a follow-up post covering common encryption use cases, leave a comment below!

> 

Reviewer: You could mention Kubernetes secrets here since by default they're just base64-encoded strings. Sealed secrets is an option here, as discussed in https://developer.okta.com/blog/2021/06/01/kubernetes-spring-boot-jhipster#store-secrets-in-git-with-sealed-secrets-and-kubeseal.

Author: ```suggestion

If you are using Kubernetes, make sure your secrets are encrypted. By default https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/[Kubernetes Secrets] store data as base64-encoded strings, as shown above. This isn't any better than plain text. The good news is there are a few alternatives: use HashiCorp's Vault, https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2021/03/amazon-eks-supports-adding-kms-envelope-encryption-to-existing-clusters/[AWS KMS], or https://dev.to/stack-labs/store-your-kubernetes-secrets-in-git-thanks-to-kubeseal-hello-sealedsecret-2i6h[Sealed Secrets].
```
small tweaks for flow.

== 3. Don't use the bytes of a string for your key

Many of us confuse the terms password and secret key. Generally speaking, passwords make poor cryptographic keys. People often choose memorable words for passwords, making them easy to guess.  Even _good_ passwords that are long and randomly generated have less entropy (the measure of the randomness) than a byte array of the same size.

To illustrate this point, think of a password of eight characters (to keep the math simple, limit the characters to displayable ASCII). There are 95 displayable ASCII characters, which means an eight-character password has a total of 95^8^ = 6.6×10^15^ possible combinations. A random array of bytes doesn't have this displayable character limit; each byte in the array has 256 possibilities, so a byte array of the same size has 256^8^ = 1.8×10^19^ total possible combinations!

Instead of getting the bytes directly from a `String`:

[source,java]
----
String secret = "password";
byte[] secretBytes = secret.getBytes(UTF_8);
----

> Use random bytes that are bas64 encoded. The example below was generated by running: `openssl rand -base64 8`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use random bytes that are base64 encoded. The example below was generated by running: `openssl rand -base64 8`
```

[source,java]
----
String secret = "JJsm0MaRPHI="; // 8 random bytes base64-encoded
byte[] secretBytes = Base64.getDecoder().decode(secret.getBytes(UTF_8));
----

[WARNING]
====

> .Did you notice that I hardcoded secrets into these examples?

Reviewer: Nice!

== Bonus: Be ready to rotate your secrets

If history has taught us anything about secrets, it's that they will leak. In the last year there have been a few notable cases of secrets exposed: https://travis-ci.community/t/security-bulletin/12081[Travis-CI] and https://about.codecov.io/security-update/[Codecov]. After these issues were disclosed, teams scrambled to update secrets that may have been affected, which often resulted in broken builds.

IMPORTANT: When people leave your project, any secrets they had access to must be updated.

Be aware of how your project uses secrets, and practice rotating them before the next leak or personnel change.

== Learn more about application security

In this post, I've described a few common anti-patterns to avoid when managing secrets for Java applications. But this list of five barely scratches the surface of application security and secret management. Check out these other posts to learn more:

- link:/blog/2019/12/20/five-tools-improve-java[Five Tools to Improve Your Java Code]
- link:/blog/2021/03/01/oauth-refcard-patterns-antipatterns[OAuth Patterns and Anti-Patterns]

> - link:/blog/2020/12/21/beginners-guide-to-jwt[A Beginner's Guide to JWTs]

Author: ```suggestion
- link:/blog/2020/12/21/beginners-guide-to-jwt[A Beginner's Guide to JWTs]
- link:/blog/2021/06/01/kubernetes-spring-boot-jhipster[Kubernetes to the Cloud with Spring Boot and JHipster]
```

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Five Anti-Patterns with Secrets in Java"
author: brian-demers
by: advocate
communities: [security,java]
description: "Learn how how to better manage and protect your passwords and API keys!"
tags: [java, security, secrets, cryptography, tips]
tweets:
- "When was the last time you checked a password into source control? 🤦 Here are a few tips to avoid that and more‼️"
- "API keys, passwords, and secrets. Learn a few common anti-patterns to avoid ⚠️"
- "Secrets, passwords, and API keys oh my‼️ Make sure you are handling them correctly 🧑‍💻"
image:
type: awareness
---

:toc: macro
:page-liquid:
:experimental:

Most applications require some sort of secret or password to enable access: database connection info, API keys, OAuth client secrets, and JWT keys, to list some examples. Dealing with secrets in your projects is always a chore, and it's often done wrong. In this post, I'll describe five common problems, which you can think of as *anti-patterns* (the opposite of a *best practice*) and I'll offer suggestions to help you avoid these issues.

toc::[]

== 1. Don't check your secrets into source control

> Checking a secret into source control is a mistake that's easily made. This is an anti-pattern that most of us have done in error at some point, even if we don't want to admit it. Once a secret is in your source control, it's there forever; it only takes https://github.com/search?q=removed+password&type=commits[a quick history search] to find.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Checking a secret into source control is a mistake that's easily made. This is an anti-pattern that most of us have done in error at some point, even if we don't want to admit it. Once a secret is in your source control, it's there forever; and can easily be found by doing a https://github.com/search?q=removed+password&type=commits[a quick history search].
```
clarify the "it"s

If you find a secret in your source, remove it and revoke it. Of course, it's best if secrets are never checked in to begin with! Watch out for them in code reviews and scan your code bases to ensure this doesn't happen: https://www.gitguardian.com/[GitGuardian] and https://github.com/awslabs/git-secrets[git-secrets].

Secrets often enter source trees by accident, usually because you temporarily typed one into a config file. When secrets are mixed in with other application properties, they become harder to spot and easier to forget about. Keep secrets out of your source entirely by using an https://12factor.net/config[external configuration] provider like https://www.vaultproject.io/[HashiCorp Vault], using environmental variables, or by keeping secrets in a separate file outside of your source tree (or one that is explicitly ignored in your `.gitignore` file.)

TIP: Check out the https://github.com/paulschwarz/spring-dotenv[spring-dotenv] to use `.env` files with your Spring projects.

> == 2. Don't conflate encoding with encryption

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== 2. Conflating encoding with encryption
```
giving all headers parallel format

assertThat(decoded, equalTo(decoded));
----

.Base64 encoded (not human-readable):
[source,java]
----
String text = "Can you still read this text?";
String encoded = Base64.getEncoder().encodeToString(text.getBytes(UTF_8));
// encoded: Q2FuIHlvdSBzdGlsbCByZWFkIHRoaXMgdGV4dD8=
String decoded = new String(Base64.getDecoder().decode(encoded.getBytes(UTF_8)));
assertThat(decoded, equalTo(decoded));
----

IMPORTANT: In both cases, the encoded data can easily be reversed, and the encoded string must be treated the same way as plain text.

=== Encryption

In contrast, data that's encrypted can only be read by authorized parties (anyone with the correct cryptographic key). When data is encrypted, the resulting value is indistinguishable from random data. Because of this, encrypted data is often also encoded to make it easier to transport. For example, in the case of JSON Web Encryption (JWE), the JSON payload is encrypted and is then transformed to a base64-encoded string.

NOTE: Encryption is a complex topic and not suitable for a quick example. If you want to see a follow-up post covering common encryption use cases, leave a comment below!

> == 3. Don't use the bytes of a string for your key

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== 3. Using the bytes of a string for your key
```

To illustrate this point, think of a password of eight characters (to keep the math simple, limit the characters to displayable ASCII). There are 95 displayable ASCII characters, which means an eight-character password has a total of 95^8^ = 6.6×10^15^ possible combinations. A random array of bytes doesn't have this displayable character limit; each byte in the array has 256 possibilities, so a byte array of the same size has 256^8^ = 1.8×10^19^ total possible combinations!

Instead of getting the bytes directly from a `String`:

[source,java]
----
String secret = "password";
byte[] secretBytes = secret.getBytes(UTF_8);
----

Use random bytes that are base64 encoded. The example below was generated by running: `openssl rand -base64 8`

[source,java]
----
String secret = "JJsm0MaRPHI="; // 8 random bytes base64-encoded
byte[] secretBytes = Base64.getDecoder().decode(secret.getBytes(UTF_8));
----

[WARNING]
====
.Did you notice that I hardcoded secrets into these examples?
[%collapsible]
=====
image::{% asset_path 'blog/antipatterns-secrets-java/facepalm.gif' %}[alt=Picard facepalm from www.reactiongifs.com/picard-facepalm/,width=400,align=left]
=====
====

> == 4. Do restrict access to secrets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== 4. Failing to restrict access to secrets
```

It's hard to keep secrets, well... secret. Do you know who has access to each secret used by your application? Secrets kept in environment variables can be viewed by anyone who has access to the running process on the system `ps e -ww -p <pid>`, or access to the Docker daemon `docker inspect <container>`.  Even "hidden" secrets used by your build server are https://www.theserverside.com/blog/Coffee-Talk-Java-News-Stories-and-Opinions/GitHub-Actions-Secrets-Example-Token-Tutorial[easy to leak]. Most popular CI services will filter build logs of passwords, but it's easy to work around filters. For example, this GitHub Actions script adds a space between each character to bypass the filtering.

{% raw %}
[source,yaml]
----
steps:
- name: Not So Hidden Secret
  run: "echo ${{secrets.TEST_SECRET}} | sed 's/./& /g'"

# output: C a n   y o u   s t i l l   r e a d   t h i s   t e x t ?
----
{% endraw %}

WARNING: I'm not suggesting you do this; doing so may get you fired. Just be aware that it can happen and treat your secrets accordingly.

> == 5. Don't build your own crypto

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== 5. Building your own crypto
```

:experimental:

Most applications require some sort of secret or password to enable access: database connection info, API keys, OAuth client secrets, and JWT keys, to list some examples. Dealing with secrets in your projects is always a chore, and it's often done wrong. In this post, I'll describe five common problems, which you can think of as *anti-patterns* (the opposite of a *best practice*) and I'll offer suggestions to help you avoid these issues.

toc::[]

== 1. Checking secrets into source control

Checking a secret into source control is a mistake that's easily made. This is an anti-pattern that most of us have done in error at some point, even if we don't want to admit it. Once a secret is in your source control, it's there forever; and can easily be found by doing a https://github.com/search?q=removed+password&type=commits[a quick history search].

If you find a secret in your source, remove it and revoke it. Of course, it's best if secrets are never checked in to begin with! Watch out for them in code reviews and scan your code bases to ensure this doesn't happen: https://www.gitguardian.com/[GitGuardian] and https://github.com/awslabs/git-secrets[git-secrets].

> Secrets often enter source trees by accident, usually because you temporarily typed one into a config file. When secrets are mixed in with other application properties, they become harder to spot and easier to forget about. Keep secrets out of your source entirely by using an https://12factor.net/config[external configuration] provider like https://www.vaultproject.io/[HashiCorp Vault], using environmental variables, or by keeping secrets in a separate file outside of your source tree (or one that is explicitly ignored in your `.gitignore` file.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secrets often enter source trees by accident, usually because you temporarily typed one into a config file. When secrets are mixed in with other application properties, they become harder to spot and easier to forget about. Keep secrets out of your source entirely by using an https://12factor.net/config[external configuration] provider like https://www.vaultproject.io/[HashiCorp Vault], using environmental variables, or by keeping secrets in a separate file outside of your source tree (or one that is explicitly ignored in your `.gitignore` file).
```

assertThat(decoded, equalTo(decoded));
----

.Base64 encoded (not human-readable):
[source,java]
----
String text = "Can you still read this text?";
String encoded = Base64.getEncoder().encodeToString(text.getBytes(UTF_8));
// encoded: Q2FuIHlvdSBzdGlsbCByZWFkIHRoaXMgdGV4dD8=
String decoded = new String(Base64.getDecoder().decode(encoded.getBytes(UTF_8)));
assertThat(decoded, equalTo(decoded));
----

IMPORTANT: In both cases, the encoded data can easily be reversed, and the encoded string must be treated the same way as plain text.

=== Encryption

In contrast, data that's encrypted can only be read by authorized parties (anyone with the correct cryptographic key). When data is encrypted, the resulting value is indistinguishable from random data. Because of this, encrypted data is often also encoded to make it easier to transport. For example, in the case of JSON Web Encryption (JWE), the JSON payload is encrypted and is then transformed to a base64-encoded string.

NOTE: Encryption is a complex topic and not suitable for a quick example. If you want to see a follow-up post covering common encryption use cases, leave a comment below!

> If you are using Kubernetes, make sure your secrets are encrypted. By default https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/[Kubernetes Secrets] store data as base64-encoded strings, as shown above. This isn't any better than plain text. The good news is there are a few alternatives: use HashiCorp's Vault, https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2021/03/amazon-eks-supports-adding-kms-envelope-encryption-to-existing-clusters/[AWS KMS], or https://dev.to/stack-labs/store-your-kubernetes-secrets-in-git-thanks-to-kubeseal-hello-sealedsecret-2i6h[Sealed Secrets].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using Kubernetes, make sure your secrets are encrypted. By default, https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/[Kubernetes Secrets] store data as base64-encoded strings, as shown above. This isn't any better than plain text. The good news is there are a few alternatives: use HashiCorp's Vault, https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2021/03/amazon-eks-supports-adding-kms-envelope-encryption-to-existing-clusters/[AWS KMS], or https://dev.to/stack-labs/store-your-kubernetes-secrets-in-git-thanks-to-kubeseal-hello-sealedsecret-2i6h[Sealed Secrets].

```
comma

== 3. Using the bytes of a string for your key

Many of us confuse the terms password and secret key. Generally speaking, passwords make poor cryptographic keys. People often choose memorable words for passwords, making them easy to guess.  Even _good_ passwords that are long and randomly generated have less entropy (the measure of the randomness) than a byte array of the same size.

> To illustrate this point, think of a password of eight characters (to keep the math simple, limit the characters to displayable ASCII). There are 95 displayable ASCII characters, which means an eight-character password has a total of 95^8^ = 6.6×10^15^ possible combinations. A random array of bytes doesn't have this displayable character limit; each byte in the array has 256 possibilities, so a byte array of the same size has 256^8^ = 1.8×10^19^ total possible combinations!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To illustrate this point, think of a password of eight characters. (To keep the math simple, limit the characters to displayable ASCII.) There are 95 displayable ASCII characters, which means an eight-character password has a total of 95^8^ = 6.6×10^15^ possible combinations. A random array of bytes doesn't have this displayable character limit; each byte in the array has 256 possibilities, so a byte array of the same size has 256^8^ = 1.8×10^19^ total possible combinations!
```
